System Design for: 'Scalable Online Shop'
This document outlines the architectural design for a scalable online shop, focusing on a microservices-based approach to ensure high availability, resilience, and independent scaling of different business capabilities.

C4 Model Diagrams
1. System Context Diagram
The System Context diagram provides a high-level view of the Online Shop system and its interactions with external users and systems. It shows the Online Shop as a central system, interacting with customers, administrators, and third-party services like payment gateways and shipping providers.

Description:

Customer: A user who browses products, adds them to a cart, and makes a purchase. They interact directly with the Online Shop.

Administrator: A user who manages products, orders, and customer data. They interact with the system's administrative interface.

Online Shop (System in Scope): The main system that manages all e-commerce business logic.

Payment Gateway: An external system that securely processes credit card and other payments. The Online Shop sends payment requests to this gateway.

Shipping Provider: An external system that handles logistics, tracking, and delivery of orders. The Online Shop sends order details to this provider for fulfillment.

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Context
    title System Context Diagram for Online Shop

    Person(customer, "Customer", "A user who browses and purchases products.")
    Person(administrator, "Administrator", "Manages the shop's catalog and orders.")

    System(online_shop, "Online Shop", "The core e-commerce platform.")

    System_Ext(payment_gateway, "Payment Gateway", "Third-party service for processing payments.")
    System_Ext(shipping_provider, "Shipping Provider", "External service for order fulfillment and tracking.")

    Rel(customer, online_shop, "Uses")
    Rel(administrator, online_shop, "Manages through")
    Rel(online_shop, payment_gateway, "Processes payments via")
    Rel(online_shop, shipping_provider, "Sends order details to")

2. Container Diagram
This diagram zooms into the Online Shop system, showing the major containers (independently deployable components). The design is based on a microservices architecture, with each container representing a specific business domain.

Description:

Web Application (Frontend): A single-page application (SPA) or a server-rendered application that customers and administrators use to interact with the system. It communicates with the API Gateway.

API Gateway: The single entry point for all external clients. It routes requests to the appropriate microservices, handles authentication, and provides a facade over the internal services.

User Service: A microservice responsible for user authentication and management (profiles, addresses, etc.). It has its own database.

Product Catalog Service: A microservice that manages product information, including descriptions, images, and categories. It is backed by a database optimized for searching.

Cart Service: A microservice dedicated to managing customer shopping carts. It stores temporary cart data in a fast, in-memory cache or database.

Order Service: The core microservice that handles the checkout and order placement process. It orchestrates communication with other services (e.g., Payment and Inventory). It has its own relational database to ensure transactional integrity.

Payment Service: A microservice that handles payment-related logic and communicates with the external Payment Gateway. It stores transaction logs in a dedicated database.

Inventory Service: A microservice that tracks product stock levels and manages inventory updates. It uses a database designed for high-concurrency read/write operations.

Database (Polyglot Persistence): Each microservice has its own dedicated database, chosen based on the specific needs of the service (e.g., a relational database for Orders, a document database for the Product Catalog, and a key-value store for the Cart).

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Container
    title Container Diagram for Online Shop

    Person(customer, "Customer")
    System_Ext(payment_gateway, "Payment Gateway")
    System_Ext(shipping_provider, "Shipping Provider")

    System_Boundary(online_shop_boundary, "Online Shop") {
        Container(web_app, "Web Application", "React/Vue.js SPA", "Provides a user interface for customers and administrators.")
        Container(api_gateway, "API Gateway", "Node.js / Go", "Routes requests to microservices, handles auth.")

        Container(user_service, "User Service", "Spring Boot / .NET", "Manages user profiles and authentication.")
        Container(catalog_service, "Product Catalog Service", "Python/Django", "Manages product data and search functionality.")
        Container(cart_service, "Cart Service", "Node.js", "Manages customer shopping carts.")
        Container(order_service, "Order Service", "Spring Boot / .NET", "Handles order creation and processing.")
        Container(payment_service, "Payment Service", "Go", "Handles payment transactions.")
        Container(inventory_service, "Inventory Service", "Java", "Tracks product stock levels.")

        ContainerDb(user_db, "User DB", "PostgreSQL", "Stores user account information.")
        ContainerDb(catalog_db, "Product Catalog DB", "Elasticsearch", "Stores product data for fast search.")
        ContainerDb(cart_db, "Cart DB", "Redis", "Stores temporary shopping cart data.")
        ContainerDb(order_db, "Order DB", "PostgreSQL", "Stores order and transaction history.")
        ContainerDb(payment_db, "Payment DB", "MySQL", "Stores payment transaction logs.")
        ContainerDb(inventory_db, "Inventory DB", "CockroachDB", "Stores product stock levels.")
    }

    Rel(customer, web_app, "Uses")
    Rel(web_app, api_gateway, "Requests data from", "HTTPS")

    Rel(api_gateway, user_service, "Routes API calls to")
    Rel(api_gateway, catalog_service, "Routes API calls to")
    Rel(api_gateway, cart_service, "Routes API calls to")
    Rel(api_gateway, order_service, "Routes API calls to")
    Rel(api_gateway, payment_service, "Routes API calls to")
    Rel(api_gateway, inventory_service, "Routes API calls to")

    Rel(user_service, user_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(catalog_service, catalog_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(cart_service, cart_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(order_service, order_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(payment_service, payment_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(inventory_service, inventory_db, "Reads/writes to")

    Rel(payment_service, payment_gateway, "Authorizes/captures payments", "HTTPS")
    Rel(order_service, shipping_provider, "Sends order for fulfillment", "Async Messaging")
    Rel(order_service, inventory_service, "Updates inventory", "Async Messaging")

3. Component Diagram (Order Service)
This diagram focuses on the internal components of the Order Service container, illustrating how it handles a new order request.

Description:

API Controller: The entry point for the Order Service. It receives API calls from the API Gateway and validates the request payload.

Order Orchestrator: A central component that orchestrates the complex order creation process. It uses a Saga pattern to ensure transactional consistency across multiple services.

Inventory Client: A component that communicates with the Inventory Service to reserve items.

Payment Client: A component that communicates with the Payment Service to authorize payment.

Order Repository: A component that manages data persistence in the Order Database, handling the saving and retrieval of order information.

Message Broker: An asynchronous communication channel (like RabbitMQ or Apache Kafka) used to send events and commands between services, ensuring loose coupling and resilience. The Order Orchestrator uses it to send messages to the Inventory and Payment services.

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Component
    title Component Diagram for Order Service

    Container(api_gateway, "API Gateway", "Node.js / Go")
    ContainerDb(order_db, "Order DB", "PostgreSQL")
    System_Ext(payment_service, "Payment Service")
    System_Ext(inventory_service, "Inventory Service")
    System_Ext(shipping_provider, "Shipping Provider")
    Container_Ext(message_broker, "Message Broker", "RabbitMQ / Apache Kafka")

    Container_Boundary(order_service, "Order Service") {
        Component(api_controller, "API Controller", "REST Endpoint", "Receives and validates order requests.")
        Component(order_orchestrator, "Order Orchestrator", "Saga Coordinator", "Manages the multi-step order flow.")
        Component(inventory_client, "Inventory Client", "gRPC Client", "Communicates with the Inventory Service.")
        Component(payment_client, "Payment Client", "gRPC Client", "Communicates with the Payment Service.")
        Component(order_repository, "Order Repository", "Spring Data JPA", "Manages persistence to the Order DB.")
    }

    Rel(api_gateway, api_controller, "Calls", "HTTPS")
    Rel(api_controller, order_orchestrator, "Calls to start order process")
    Rel(order_orchestrator, message_broker, "Sends 'Authorize Payment' message to")
    Rel(message_broker, payment_service, "Delivers message to")
    Rel(order_orchestrator, message_broker, "Sends 'Reserve Inventory' message to")
    Rel(message_broker, inventory_service, "Delivers message to")
    Rel(order_orchestrator, order_repository, "Updates order status in")
    Rel(order_repository, order_db, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(order_orchestrator, shipping_provider, "Sends order for fulfillment to", "Async messaging")

Architecture Decision Records
ADR 1: Use a Microservices Architecture for a Scalable Online Shop
Status: Proposed

Context:
The business goal is to build a modern online shop that can scale to handle a large and growing number of customers and products, especially during peak sales periods like Black Friday. The system must be resilient, with high availability, and support rapid, independent development and deployment of new features without impacting the entire platform. A monolithic architecture, while simpler to start with, would eventually become a bottleneck for scalability and development velocity.

Decision:
We will adopt a microservices architectural pattern. The system will be decomposed into a set of loosely coupled, independently deployable services, each owning a specific business capability (e.g., User Management, Product Catalog, Orders, Inventory, and Payments). These services will communicate with each other via a combination of synchronous (e.g., REST/gRPC) and asynchronous (e.g., message queues) mechanisms.

Consequences:

Positive:

Scalability: Individual services can be scaled independently based on their specific load. For example, the Product Catalog Service can be scaled to handle high read traffic during browsing, while the Order Service can be scaled to handle peak transaction volumes.

Resilience: A failure in one service (e.g., a bug in the Reviews service) will not bring down the entire system, ensuring critical functions like checkout remain available.

Development Velocity: Small, focused teams can work on different services concurrently, using their preferred technology stack, leading to faster feature delivery.

Technology Flexibility: Each service can use the best-fit technology for its specific function (e.g., a relational database for orders, a search-optimized database for products).

Negative:

Increased Complexity: The overall system is more complex to design, develop, deploy, and operate. This includes managing distributed transactions, service discovery, logging, monitoring, and debugging across multiple services.

Operational Overhead: Requires a mature DevOps culture and tools for container orchestration (e.g., Kubernetes), service meshes, and automated CI/CD pipelines.

Data Consistency: Maintaining data consistency across multiple, independent databases requires careful design, often using patterns like event sourcing and the Saga pattern, which adds complexity.

Inter-service Communication: Network latency and potential failures in communication between services must be handled gracefully.

Alternatives Considered:

Monolithic Architecture: This approach would have a single, large application containing all business logic. It's simpler to start with and easier to deploy initially. However, it would eventually become a bottleneck for scalability, development, and team autonomy, as any change requires deploying the entire application. The risk of a single point of failure is also much higher.

Modular Monolith: A middle-ground approach where a single application is structured into well-defined, modular components. While it offers some of the benefits of microservices (e.g., separation of concerns) without the full operational complexity, it still suffers from scaling limitations, as the entire monolith must be scaled, and it lacks true independent deployment of features. It was rejected because our primary requirement is a system that can scale infinitely and support a large number of development teams.

ADR 2: Distributed Transaction Management Using the Saga Pattern
Status: Proposed

Context:
In a microservices architecture, business processes often span multiple services, each with its own database. For critical operations like placing an order, maintaining transactional integrity (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability - ACID) across these services is challenging. A traditional two-phase commit (2PC) is generally avoided in microservices due to tight coupling and performance overhead.

Decision:
We will implement the Saga pattern to manage distributed transactions for complex business workflows, such as order placement. Specifically, we'll use an orchestration-based Saga. The Order Service will act as the Saga orchestrator, initiating the transaction by sending commands (e.g., "Reserve Inventory," "Authorize Payment") to other services via a Message Broker. Each participating service will then execute its local transaction and publish events (e.g., "InventoryReserved," "PaymentAuthorized"). The Order Orchestrator will listen for these events, update the order status, and trigger subsequent steps or compensating transactions if a failure occurs (e.g., "Release Inventory," "Refund Payment").

Consequences:

Positive:

Loose Coupling: Services remain independent and don't directly coordinate distributed transactions, enhancing autonomy and resilience.

Resilience: The Saga pattern inherently supports fault tolerance through compensating transactions, ensuring business consistency even if a step fails.

Scalability: Asynchronous communication and independent service execution allow for better horizontal scalability than 2PC.

Event-Driven Nature: Naturally integrates with an event-driven architecture, providing an audit trail of business events.

Negative:

Increased Complexity: Designing, implementing, and monitoring Sagas is significantly more complex than traditional ACID transactions. Debugging distributed flows can be challenging.

Eventual Consistency: The system achieves eventual consistency rather than immediate strong consistency across all services, which might require careful consideration for user experience.

Compensating Transactions: Implementing rollback logic (compensating transactions) for every step adds development overhead.

Monitoring and Observability: Requires robust tooling for tracing Saga execution across multiple services.

Alternatives Considered:

Two-Phase Commit (2PC): While offering strong consistency, 2PC tightly couples services, introduces significant latency, and creates a single point of failure (the transaction coordinator), making it unsuitable for a highly scalable and resilient microservices environment. Rejected for scalability and resilience concerns.

Direct Synchronous API Calls without Compensation: Services would call each other directly. If a downstream service fails, there's no inherent mechanism to roll back or compensate for already completed upstream actions, leading to inconsistent states and data integrity issues. Rejected for lack of transactional integrity and resilience.

ADR 3: Product Catalog Storage and Search with a Distributed Search Engine
Status: Proposed

Context:
The Product Catalog is a highly critical component, requiring efficient storage, management, and fast, flexible search capabilities (full-text search, faceted search, filtering by attributes) across millions of products. Traditional relational databases, while good for structured data, struggle with the performance and flexibility needed for complex, real-time search queries at scale.

Decision:
We will use a distributed search engine (e.g., Elasticsearch or Apache Solr) as the primary data store for the Product Catalog Service. This service will ingest product data, index it for full-text search, and provide rich querying capabilities. The Product Catalog Service will also maintain a small, transactional relational database (e.g., PostgreSQL) for master product data that requires strong consistency, while the search engine will be used for fast read-heavy operations. The search engine will be kept eventually consistent with the master data store.

Consequences:

Positive:

Blazing Fast Search: Distributed search engines are purpose-built for high-performance, full-text, and complex (faceted) queries, delivering results in milliseconds.

Scalability: Can be horizontally scaled by adding more nodes to handle increasing data volume and query load.

Flexible Schema: Supports flexible, semi-structured data, which is ideal for product attributes that can vary widely.

Rich Query Language: Provides powerful query capabilities that go beyond standard SQL.

Negative:

Operational Complexity: Deploying and managing a distributed search engine cluster requires specialized expertise and infrastructure.

Eventual Consistency: Data in the search index will be eventually consistent with the master transactional data, meaning a newly updated product might not be immediately reflected in search results for a brief period.

Resource Intensive: Running a distributed search engine can be resource-intensive in terms of CPU, memory, and disk I/O.

Data Synchronization: Requires a robust mechanism (e.g., change data capture, event streams) to keep the search index synchronized with the master product data.

Alternatives Considered:

Relational Database with Full-Text Search Extensions (e.g., PostgreSQL with pg_trgm): While better than no full-text search, these extensions typically don't scale or perform as well as dedicated search engines for very large datasets and complex queries. They also lack native support for features like faceting and advanced relevance scoring. Rejected for performance and scalability limitations.

General-Purpose NoSQL Document Database (e.g., MongoDB): Can store product data flexibly but generally provides less sophisticated and slower full-text search capabilities compared to specialized search engines. While some offer full-text features, they are often not optimized for the scale and complexity required. Rejected for less optimized search performance.

ADR 4: Asynchronous Communication with a Message Broker
Status: Proposed

Context:
In a microservices architecture, services need to communicate with each other. Direct synchronous HTTP/RPC calls can introduce tight coupling, increase latency, and lead to cascading failures if a called service is unavailable. Many interactions, especially for non-critical updates or notifications, do not require an immediate, blocking response.

Decision:
We will primarily use a Message Broker (e.g., Apache Kafka or RabbitMQ) for asynchronous, event-driven communication between services. Services will publish events (e.g., OrderPlaced, InventoryReserved, ProductUpdated) to specific topics/queues. Other services interested in these events will subscribe to the relevant topics/queues and react accordingly. Synchronous communication (e.g., REST API calls) will be reserved for scenarios where an immediate response is absolutely required (e.g., retrieving a user's profile for login validation by the API Gateway).

Consequences:

Positive:

Loose Coupling: Services are decoupled, publishing events without knowing or caring about their consumers, enhancing autonomy.

Increased Resilience: If a consuming service is temporarily down, messages can be queued and processed once it recovers, preventing data loss and cascading failures.

Scalability: Message brokers can handle high volumes of messages, and producers/consumers can scale independently.

Improved Responsiveness: Requesting services don't have to wait for a synchronous response from all downstream services, leading to faster responses for clients.

Auditability: A durable message log (especially with Kafka) provides an excellent audit trail of all events in the system.

Negative:

Eventual Consistency: Asynchronous communication often leads to eventual consistency, where data might not be immediately consistent across all services. This needs to be managed and communicated.

Increased Complexity: Introducing a message broker adds another critical component to manage, monitor, and troubleshoot. Distributed event chains can be challenging to debug.

Order Guarantees: Ensuring strict message ordering across multiple partitions or queues can be complex and requires careful design.

Duplicate Message Handling: Consumers must be designed to be idempotent to handle potential duplicate messages from the broker.

Alternatives Considered:

Direct Synchronous API/RPC Calls: Services would communicate directly via HTTP/REST or gRPC. This leads to tight coupling, increased network latency for each hop, and makes the system vulnerable to cascading failures if one service becomes unresponsive. Rejected for scalability and resilience issues.

Database Polling: Services would repeatedly query other services' databases for changes. This is highly inefficient, resource-intensive, and introduces significant latency. Rejected for performance and tight coupling to database schemas.
