System Design for: 'Stock Exchange System'
This document outlines the architectural design for a scalable and high-performance Stock Exchange system. The design prioritizes low-latency trade execution, high availability, and the integrity of financial transactions. It is a distributed system to handle the massive volume of real-time market data and a high-frequency of orders.

C4 Model Diagrams
1. System Context Diagram
The System Context diagram provides a high-level view of the Stock Exchange system and its interactions with external users and systems. It shows the core exchange interacting with traders, brokerage firms, and financial news services.

Description:

Trader: A person who submits buy and sell orders to the exchange. They can be individual investors or institutional traders.

Brokerage Firm: An institutional client that provides access to the exchange for its users and manages their accounts. It is the primary way most traders interact with the exchange.

Financial News Service: An external system that consumes real-time market data (e.g., stock prices, trading volumes) from the exchange to provide news and analysis.

Stock Exchange (System in Scope): The central system that facilitates the trading of financial instruments, matches orders, and disseminates market data.

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Context
    title System Context Diagram for Stock Exchange System

    Person(trader, "Trader", "Submits buy and sell orders.")
    System_Ext(brokerage_firm, "Brokerage Firm", "Provides access to the exchange for traders.")
    System_Ext(financial_news, "Financial News Service", "Consumes market data for analysis.")

    System(stock_exchange, "Stock Exchange", "The central system for trading financial instruments.")

    Rel(trader, brokerage_firm, "Submits orders via")
    Rel(brokerage_firm, stock_exchange, "Sends orders to/receives data from")
    Rel(stock_exchange, financial_news, "Disseminates real-time market data to")

2. Container Diagram
This diagram zooms into the Stock Exchange system, showing the major containers. The design is a distributed system with specialized components for different aspects of trading.

Description:

Order Management System (OMS): The entry point for all incoming orders. It validates orders, manages their lifecycle (e.g., open, filled, canceled), and routes them to the Matching Engine.

Market Data Publisher: A high-throughput component that broadcasts real-time market data, such as the best bid and ask prices, and trade executions, to subscribers.

Matching Engine: The core of the exchange. It is an extremely low-latency, in-memory component that matches buy and sell orders to execute trades. It uses a specialized data structure like a limit order book.

Risk Management Service: A component that performs real-time checks on orders to ensure they comply with risk limits and regulations. It can reject orders that exceed these limits.

Clearing and Settlement Service: A post-trade component that finalizes transactions, ensuring that funds and securities are transferred correctly between accounts. It communicates with external banking and depository systems.

Historical Data Store: A database optimized for storing large volumes of historical trade data for auditing, backtesting, and reporting purposes.

Order Book (Data Store): The primary in-memory data store for the Matching Engine. It holds all active limit orders for a financial instrument.

Streaming Data Platform: A distributed message queue (e.g., Apache Kafka) used for broadcasting market data and managing the flow of orders between services.

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Container
    title Container Diagram for Stock Exchange System

    System_Ext(brokerage_firm, "Brokerage Firm")
    System_Ext(financial_news, "Financial News Service")

    System_Boundary(stock_exchange_boundary, "Stock Exchange System") {
        Container(oms, "Order Management System", "Java/C++", "Validates and manages the lifecycle of orders.")
        Container(matching_engine, "Matching Engine", "C++", "Matches buy and sell orders in real-time.")
        Container(market_data_publisher, "Market Data Publisher", "Java/Go", "Broadcasts real-time market data.")
        Container(risk_management_service, "Risk Management Service", "Java", "Performs pre-trade risk checks.")
        Container(clearing_service, "Clearing and Settlement Service", "COBOL/Java", "Finalizes trades and transfers assets.")

        ContainerDb(historical_db, "Historical Data Store", "KDB+/TimescaleDB", "Stores historical trade data.")
        ContainerDb(order_book, "Order Book", "In-memory Data Grid", "Holds active orders for matching.")
        Container_Ext(streaming_platform, "Streaming Data Platform", "Apache Kafka", "Manages high-volume data streams.")
    }

    Rel(brokerage_firm, oms, "Sends orders to", "FIX Protocol")
    Rel(oms, streaming_platform, "Pushes valid orders to")
    Rel(streaming_platform, matching_engine, "Feeds orders to")
    Rel(streaming_platform, risk_management_service, "Feeds orders for risk checks")
    Rel(matching_engine, market_data_publisher, "Notifies of trade executions")
    Rel(market_data_publisher, financial_news, "Broadcasts market data to")
    Rel(matching_engine, historical_db, "Persists trade data to")
    Rel(matching_engine, clearing_service, "Sends trade details to")
    Rel(oms, order_book, "Adds/removes orders from")

3. Component Diagram (Matching Engine)
This diagram focuses on the internal components of the Matching Engine container, illustrating how it processes an order and matches it against the order book.

Description:

Order Ingestion Component: The entry point for the Matching Engine. It receives orders from the Streaming Data Platform.

Order Book Manager: The core logic that manages the limit order book data structure. It adds new orders to the book and removes filled or canceled orders.

Matching Algorithm: A critical component that implements the matching logic. It checks for a match between the incoming order and existing orders in the book (e.g., a buy order at a price equal to or higher than a sell order's price).

Trade Execution Publisher: A high-speed component that publishes details of executed trades to a message queue for other services (e.g., Market Data Publisher, Historical Data Store, and Clearing Service).

Mermaid.js Code:

C4Component
    title Component Diagram for Matching Engine

    Container_Ext(streaming_platform, "Streaming Data Platform", "Apache Kafka")
    ContainerDb(order_book, "Order Book", "In-memory Data Grid")
    Container_Ext(clearing_service, "Clearing and Settlement Service")
    Container_Ext(market_data_publisher, "Market Data Publisher")

    Container_Boundary(matching_engine, "Matching Engine") {
        Component(order_ingestion, "Order Ingestion Component", "Kafka Consumer", "Consumes orders from the streaming platform.")
        Component(order_book_manager, "Order Book Manager", "Data Structure Logic", "Manages the in-memory limit order book.")
        Component(matching_algorithm, "Matching Algorithm", "Core Logic", "Implements the trade matching rules.")
        Component(trade_execution_publisher, "Trade Execution Publisher", "Kafka Producer", "Publishes executed trades.")
    }

    Rel(streaming_platform, order_ingestion, "Sends new orders to")
    Rel(order_ingestion, order_book_manager, "Adds/updates orders in")
    Rel(order_book_manager, order_book, "Reads/writes to")
    Rel(order_book_manager, matching_algorithm, "Passes orders to be matched")
    Rel(matching_algorithm, trade_execution_publisher, "Sends executed trades to")
    Rel(trade_execution_publisher, clearing_service, "Sends trade details for settlement", "Async Messaging")
    Rel(trade_execution_publisher, market_data_publisher, "Notifies of new trades for broadcast", "Async Messaging")

Architecture Decision Records
ADR 1: Use an In-Memory Matching Engine for Ultra-Low Latency
Status: Proposed

Context:
In a stock exchange system, the time it takes to match a buy order with a sell order is a critical performance metric. High-frequency trading and algorithmic trading demand latency measured in microseconds, not milliseconds. Using a traditional disk-based database for the order book would introduce unacceptable I/O latency, making the system non-competitive. The core function of the exchange—the order matching—must be as fast as physically possible.

Decision:
The core Matching Engine will be an in-memory application. All active orders will be stored in a specialized, volatile data structure (e.g., a hash map or a tree) in the server's RAM. The entire matching process—receiving an order, looking up a match, and executing the trade—will occur in memory to eliminate disk I/O latency. Persistence will be handled asynchronously by a separate, high-performance logging or replication service to a disk-based data store.

Consequences:

Positive:

Ultra-Low Latency: This design provides the lowest possible latency for trade execution, which is crucial for a competitive exchange.

High Throughput: By avoiding disk I/O, the system can process a very large number of orders per second, handling high-frequency trading volumes.

Simplicity of Logic: The in-memory data structure is simpler to manage and access than a complex, distributed database, allowing the core matching logic to be highly optimized.

Negative:

Data Volatility: Since the primary order book is in memory, a system crash or power failure would result in the loss of all active orders. This requires a robust and highly reliable asynchronous persistence mechanism (e.g., using a write-ahead log) and a fast recovery process to restore the order book from disk.

Memory Footprint: The entire order book must fit into the server's RAM. While this is feasible for a single instrument, it requires significant memory capacity for an exchange that trades thousands of different instruments. This can be mitigated by sharding the order book by instrument.

Complexity of Asynchronous Persistence: Ensuring that the in-memory state is consistently and correctly replicated to disk without introducing blocking operations is a complex engineering challenge.

Alternatives Considered:

Disk-Based Database: Using a traditional relational or NoSQL database for the order book. This would provide strong durability out-of-the-box but would introduce unacceptable latency for order matching, making the system unsuitable for modern trading.

Distributed Database with In-Memory Caching: Using a distributed database with a large cache layer. While this is a common pattern for high-performance systems, the latency introduced by network calls between the application and the database/cache, even for in-memory databases, is higher than a purely in-memory solution where data and logic are co-located in the same process. It was rejected because the primary requirement of a stock exchange is absolute minimal latency.

ADR 2: Dissemination of Real-Time Market Data via Multicast/WebSockets
Status: Proposed

Context:
A stock exchange must efficiently disseminate real-time market data (e.g., best bid/ask, last traded price, volume) to thousands of subscribed brokerage firms and financial news services. The volume of data is immense, and latency for delivery is critical. Traditional HTTP polling is completely inadequate for this requirement.

Decision:
For internal distribution and high-performance clients, we will utilize Multicast UDP for market data dissemination. This allows a single data packet to be sent to multiple recipients simultaneously, significantly reducing network load on the publisher. For external clients, especially those that cannot consume multicast (e.g., web-based applications, clients behind firewalls), a WebSockets-based push service will be employed. This service will subscribe to the internal multicast stream and fan out data to connected clients, potentially with different data granularities based on subscription tiers.

Consequences:

Positive:

Ultra-Low Latency (Multicast): Multicast offers the lowest possible latency for data distribution to multiple subscribers within a controlled network environment, as the data is sent once and routed by network infrastructure.

Scalability (Multicast): The network itself handles the fan-out, making it highly scalable for increasing numbers of internal subscribers without increasing load on the Market Data Publisher.

Broad Reach (WebSockets): WebSockets provide real-time, bi-directional communication over standard HTTP/TCP, enabling external clients and browser-based applications to receive real-time data efficiently.

Reduced Overhead (WebSockets): WebSockets maintain a persistent connection, eliminating the overhead of repeated HTTP requests.

Negative:

Network Complexity (Multicast): Multicast requires specialized network configuration (IGMP, PIM) and is typically restricted to controlled environments, making it unsuitable for public internet distribution.

Reliability (Multicast UDP): UDP is unreliable; lost packets are not retransmitted by the protocol. This requires application-level handling for re-requesting missing data or accepting minor data loss for extremely high-speed feeds.

Stateful Connections (WebSockets): Maintaining thousands or millions of WebSocket connections requires significant server resources and adds complexity for load balancing and session management.

Increased Latency (WebSockets): While low, WebSocket latency is higher than multicast due to TCP overhead and traversing the application layer.

Alternatives Considered:

HTTP Polling: Clients repeatedly request updates from the server. This is entirely unsuitable for real-time market data due to high latency, massive server load, and inefficient network usage. Rejected for performance and scalability.

Server-Sent Events (SSE): Provides a uni-directional push from server to client over HTTP. While better than polling, it's not as performant or broadly supported as WebSockets for high-volume, continuous data streams, and lacks bi-directional capabilities needed for potential client interactions. Rejected for scalability and functionality limitations.

Dedicated FIX Protocol Connections: While FIX is the standard for order routing, using dedicated FIX sessions for market data dissemination to every subscriber would lead to connection scalability issues and high resource consumption for broad market data feeds. Rejected for overhead at scale.

ADR 3: Order Validation and Risk Management as a Pre-Trade, Low-Latency Service
Status: Accepted

Context:
Every order submitted to the exchange must undergo rigorous validation and risk checks before it reaches the Matching Engine. This is crucial for regulatory compliance, preventing erroneous trades, and ensuring the financial stability of the market participants. These checks must be performed with extremely low latency to avoid delaying legitimate trades.

Decision:
The Risk Management Service will operate as a pre-trade, low-latency validation pipeline immediately after an order is received by the Order Management System (OMS). It will perform a series of checks, including:

Syntactic Validation: Ensuring the order adheres to the FIX protocol or API specification.

Semantic Validation: Checking for valid instrument, price, quantity, and account details.

Credit/Capital Checks: Verifying the trader or brokerage firm has sufficient funds/securities to execute the trade.

Regulatory Compliance: Ensuring the order adheres to market rules (e.g., price limits, short-selling rules).

Orders failing these checks will be rejected instantly and not proceed to the Matching Engine. The service will be horizontally scalable and designed for minimal processing time.

Consequences:

Positive:

Financial Integrity: Prevents erroneous or non-compliant orders from impacting the market, protecting traders and the exchange.

Regulatory Compliance: Ensures adherence to strict financial regulations, avoiding penalties and maintaining market trust.

Low Latency Pre-checks: By rejecting invalid orders early, the Matching Engine is shielded from unnecessary processing, maintaining its ultra-low latency.

Scalability: The Risk Management Service can be scaled independently, allowing it to handle peak order submission rates.

Negative:

Increased System Complexity: Adds an additional, critical path component that must be highly available and performant.

Potential for Bottleneck: If not designed and scaled correctly, the Risk Management Service itself could become a latency bottleneck for order flow.

Maintenance Overhead: Updating risk rules and validation logic requires careful testing and deployment to avoid unintended side effects.

Data Dependencies: Requires real-time access to user account balances, positions, and current market rules, necessitating efficient data synchronization.

Alternatives Considered:

Post-Trade Risk Management: Performing risk checks after a trade has been executed. This is unacceptable for a stock exchange, as it could lead to non-deliverable trades, market manipulation, and severe financial losses before issues are detected. Rejected for critical risk exposure.

Client-Side Validation Only: Relying solely on brokerage firm systems for validation. While useful, this cannot be fully trusted as the ultimate gatekeeper for exchange integrity. The exchange must perform its own independent checks. Rejected for security and regulatory non-compliance.

Batch Risk Processing: Running risk checks in batches. This introduces unacceptable delays for real-time trading and would not prevent problematic orders from reaching the Matching Engine. Rejected for real-time performance and integrity.

ADR 4: Transactional Persistence and Recovery for Trade Data
Status: Proposed

Context:
Executed trades represent immutable financial transactions that must be recorded with absolute durability and consistency. While the Matching Engine operates in-memory for speed (ADR 1), all trade executions and order lifecycle events (submissions, cancellations) must be persistently stored to ensure that no data is lost in case of a system failure, and for auditing, regulatory reporting, and clearing/settlement processes.

Decision:
We will implement a write-ahead log (WAL) and synchronous replication strategy for critical trade and order data.

Write-Ahead Log: The Matching Engine will asynchronously write all order events (receipt, modification, execution) to a local, append-only Write-Ahead Log (persisted to SSD) before confirming the operation to upstream systems. This ensures immediate durability.

Synchronous Replication: A dedicated Persistence Service will consume these WAL entries and synchronously replicate them to a highly available, clustered Historical Data Store (e.g., KDB+, TimescaleDB or a sharded PostgreSQL cluster). This will ensure that at least two independent, geographically separated nodes have received and committed the data before it's considered fully durable.

Fast Recovery: In the event of a Matching Engine failure, a new instance can rapidly replay its WAL and/or restore its state from the synchronously replicated Historical Data Store, ensuring minimal downtime and no data loss.

Consequences:

Positive:

Absolute Durability: Ensures that no executed trade or critical order event is ever lost, even in the face of sudden system failures.

Strong Consistency: Guarantees that the state of the exchange can always be reliably reconstructed and audited.

Fast Recovery: Minimizes recovery time objectives (RTO) by enabling quick restoration of the Matching Engine's state.

Auditability: Provides a complete, immutable log of all market activity for regulatory and historical analysis.

Negative:

Increased Latency (Marginal): Synchronous replication inherently adds a small amount of latency compared to purely asynchronous persistence. However, this is minimized by fast local WAL writes and optimized replication protocols.

Complex Implementation: Building and managing a robust WAL and synchronous replication system requires significant expertise in distributed systems and fault tolerance.

Resource Intensive: Requires dedicated, high-performance storage (SSDs for WAL) and network bandwidth for replication.

Consistency Challenges: Maintaining strong consistency across multiple distributed replicas while still achieving high performance is a non-trivial engineering challenge.

Alternatives Considered:

Asynchronous Persistence to a Single Database: Writing trade data to a single, disk-based database asynchronously. This would offer lower latency for the Matching Engine but would introduce a window of data loss in case of an immediate failure of both the Matching Engine and the single database. Rejected for insufficient durability and consistency.

Pure In-Memory (No Persistence): Running the Matching Engine without any external persistence. This is completely unacceptable for a financial system where every transaction must be durably recorded. Rejected for fundamental integrity reasons.

Two-Phase Commit (2PC) for Every Trade: Using a standard 2PC protocol to commit every trade to a distributed database. While ensuring consistency, 2PC introduces significant latency overhead and is not suitable for high-frequency trading volumes. Rejected for performance.
